.\" Manpage for groovy (groovyrs).
.\" Contact https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/groovyrs to correct errors or omissions.
.TH GROOVY 1 "2026-07-20" "groovyrs 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
groovy \- Groovy on fusevm, a compiled Groovy runtime (bytecode VM + Cranelift JIT)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B groovy
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR] [\fIARGS\fR...]
.br
.B groovy
.B \-e
.I SCRIPT
.br
.B groovy
.RB { \-\-lsp | \-\-dap }
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B groovyrs
lexes and parses Groovy script source and lowers it to
.B fusevm
bytecode executed on a three\-tier Cranelift JIT. There is no bespoke VM and no
JVM; execution and codegen live in fusevm, the same engine behind zshrs, stryke,
awkrs, ruby, python, php, and node.
.PP
The current slice targets the Groovy
.I script
model: a
.I .groovy
file is a sequence of top\-level statements (no enclosing class or
.BR main ).
Covered surface: \fBdef\fR / typed local declarations, script\-binding
assignments and compound assignments, arithmetic / comparison / logic
expressions, \fBif\fR / \fBwhile\fR, the C\-style \fBfor (;;)\fR and the
\fBfor (x in a..b)\fR range loop, \fBbreak\fR / \fBcontinue\fR, and the
\fBprintln\fR / \fBprint\fR commands. Groovy's \fB/\fR divides as BigDecimal
(\fB7/2\fR is \fB3.5\fR, not \fB3\fR), and \fB+\fR concatenates when either
operand is a String.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-e \fISCRIPT\fR
Run an inline script string instead of a file, then exit.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-tokens
Print the lexer token stream for the script and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-ast
Print the parsed AST for the script and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-disasm
Print a fusevm bytecode disassembly listing (with source line numbers) and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-lsp
Speak the Language Server Protocol over stdio (diagnostics from the runtime
parser, plus keyword / command completion and hover).
.TP
.B \-\-dap
Speak the Debug Adapter Protocol over stdio (source\-line breakpoints, stepping,
and locals inspection on the single script frame).
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Print the version banner and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B 0
on success;
.B 1
on a lex / parse / compile error or a runtime error (reported to stderr as
\fBgroovyrs: \fR\fIreason\fR).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Run a file:
.RS
.EX
groovy Hello.groovy
.EE
.RE
.PP
Inline one\-liner:
.RS
.EX
groovy \-e 'for (i in 1..3) println(i * i)'
.EE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR groovyall (1)
.PP
Full reference: https://menketechnologies.github.io/groovyrs/
