.\" groovyall(1) — comprehensive all-in-one man page for groovyrs.
.\" Modeled after zshall(1): the major sections of the reference in one document.
.\" Render with:  man -l man/man1/groovyall.1
.\" Install:      cp man/man1/groovyall.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
.TH GROOVYALL 1 "2026-07-20" "groovyrs 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
groovyall \- the groovyrs comprehensive reference (invocation, language subset,
fusevm bytecode VM, Cranelift JIT, and the LSP / DAP / disassembler tooling)
.SH OVERVIEW
This is the all\-in\-one
.B groovy
manual, modeled on
.BR zshall (1).
It concatenates the major sections of the groovyrs reference into a single page
so you can grep with `/`:
.RS 2
.PP
.B 1.  INVOCATION
.RB "\(em " "CLI options, -e, exit status"
.br
.B 2.  LANGUAGE
.RB "\(em " "declarations, expressions, control flow, ranges"
.br
.B 3.  SEMANTICS
.RB "\(em " "Groovy / division, + concatenation, value printing"
.br
.B 4.  ENGINE
.RB "\(em " "fusevm bytecode VM, Cranelift JIT, no JVM"
.br
.B 5.  TOOLING
.RB "\(em " "--lsp, --dap, --disasm, --dump-tokens, --dump-ast"
.RE
.SH 1. INVOCATION
.B groovy
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR] [\fIARGS\fR...]
.PP
The program text is a
.I .groovy
file argument, or an inline string with
.BR \-e .
Introspection flags
.RB ( \-\-dump\-tokens ,
.BR \-\-dump\-ast ,
.BR \-\-disasm )
print and exit without running. The protocol servers
.RB ( \-\-lsp ,
.BR \-\-dap )
take no file and speak their protocol on stdio. Errors are reported to stderr as
\fBgroovyrs: \fR\fIreason\fR; exit status is
.B 0
on success and
.B 1
on any error.
.SH 2. LANGUAGE
groovyrs targets the Groovy
.I script
model: top\-level statements, no enclosing class or
.BR main .
.TP
.B Declarations
\fBdef\fR \fIname\fR [\fB=\fR \fIexpr\fR] declares a dynamically\-typed local; a
typed form \fBType\fR \fIname\fR [\fB=\fR \fIexpr\fR] is accepted (the type is
retained for diagnostics only). A bare \fIname\fR \fB=\fR \fIexpr\fR with no prior
declaration creates a script binding, as in Groovy.
.TP
.B Expressions
Integer, decimal, string (single/double quoted), boolean, and \fBnull\fR
literals; variable reads; unary \fB\-\fR / \fB!\fR; binary \fB+ \- * / %\fR,
comparisons \fB== != < > <= >=\fR, and short\-circuiting \fB&& ||\fR;
post\-increment / decrement \fBi++\fR / \fBi\-\-\fR.
.TP
.B Control flow
\fBif\fR / \fBelse\fR, \fBwhile\fR, the C\-style \fBfor (init; cond; update)\fR,
and the range loop \fBfor (\fR\fIx\fR \fBin\fR \fIa\fR\fB..\fR\fIb\fR\fB)\fR
(inclusive) or \fB..<\fR (half\-open); \fBbreak\fR and \fBcontinue\fR. A bare
\fBreturn\fR ends the script.
.SH 3. SEMANTICS
.TP
.B Division
Groovy divides two integers as BigDecimal: \fB7/2\fR is \fB3.5\fR; an exact
division yields an integer (\fB4/2\fR is \fB2\fR). A decimal operand forces
decimal division.
.TP
.B Plus
\fB+\fR is string concatenation when either operand is a String, using Groovy's
value\-to\-string rules (\fBtrue\fR/\fBfalse\fR, a whole decimal as \fB3.0\fR,
\fBnull\fR).
.TP
.B Printing
\fBprintln\fR / \fBprint\fR format through Groovy's toString rules rather than
fusevm's shell\-flavoured rendering.
.SH 4. ENGINE
Groovy source is lexed and parsed to an AST, then lowered to a
.B fusevm::Chunk
(stack bytecode). fusevm runs the chunk on a three\-tier Cranelift JIT with a
persistent on\-disk cache of compiled native code, so hot loops trace\-compile and
warm runs skip recompilation. There is no bespoke VM and no JVM: execution and
codegen are the shared fusevm engine. Groovy semantics fusevm's default flavour
does not provide (String \fB+\fR, BigDecimal \fB/\fR, Groovy value printing) are
supplied by a strict numeric hook and a small set of registered builtins.
.SH 5. TOOLING
.TP
.B \-\-disasm
Prints the lowered bytecode with per\-statement source line numbers.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-tokens ", " \-\-dump\-ast
Print the lexer token stream / parsed AST and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-lsp
A Language Server over stdio: diagnostics come from the runtime's own parser (a
syntax error maps to its reported line); completion and hover draw on the
keyword / literal / command corpus that also generates
.IR docs/reference.html .
.TP
.B \-\-dap
A Debug Adapter over stdio. The script is compiled with per\-statement line
markers and run without the tracing JIT so every marker fires; source\-line
breakpoints, stepping (\fBnext\fR / \fBstepIn\fR / \fBstepOut\fR over the single
script frame), a \fBstackTrace\fR, and \fBvariables\fR (script locals) are
supported. Program \fBprintln\fR output is forwarded as \fBoutput\fR events so it
never corrupts the JSON channel.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR groovy (1)
.PP
Full reference: https://menketechnologies.github.io/groovyrs/
